11.5 Using References of Wildcard Parameterized Types
A wildcard type can be used to declare parameterized references—that is, references whose type is a wildcard parameterized type.

In this section, we look at how such references are used in the following contexts:

Assignment between such references

Calling methods of generic types using such references

The generic class Node<E> used in this subsection is defined in Example 11.2, p.
 568.


Generic Reference Assignment

A reference of a supertype can refer to an object of a subtype, and this substitution principle applies to parameterized types as well.

Assignment compatibility is according to the type hierarchy of the parameterized types.

Figure 11.5 shows partial type hierarchy for selected parameterized types of the generic class Node<E>.

It combines the type hierarchies from Figure 11.3 and Figure 11.4.

As we would expect, widening reference conversions according to the type hierarchy are always type-safe.

All but the last assignment statement in the code below are legal.

The types Node<Number> and Node<Integer> are unrelated.

(The notation B <: A means B is a subtype of A.)


Node<Object>  objNode = new Node<Object>(100, null);
Node<Number>  numNode = new Node<Number>(200, null);
Node<Integer> intNode = new Node<Integer>(300, null);
Node<? extends Number> extNumNode
                       = intNode; // Node<Integer> <: Node<? extends Number>
Node<? super Integer>  supIntNode
                       = numNode; // Node<Number> <: Node<? super Integer>
supIntNode = objNode;             // Node<Object> <: Node<? super Integer>
numNode    = intNode;             // Compile-time error! Types unrelated.

In the code below, we get an error at (1) because the types Node<? extends Number> and Node<? super Number> are unrelated, but that is not the case for the types Node<? extends Object> and Node<? super Object> at (2).

The family of types denoted by the type Node<? super Object> has the subtype Node<Object> only, which is also a subtype of the type Node<? extends Object>.

In the assignment at (3), the type Node<? extends Object> is not a subtype of the type Node<? super Object>, but the converse is true as established at (2).



Node<? super Number>   supNumNode;
Node<? extends Object> extObjNode;
Node<? super Object>   supObjNode;
extNumNode = supNumNode;  // (1) Compile-time error! Types unrelated.

extObjNode = supObjNode;  // (2) Node<? super Object> <: Node<? extends Object>
supObjNode = extObjNode;  // (3) Compile-time error!
Narrowing reference conversion requires an explicit cast, except for the cases noted below (see also Figure 11.5).

The raw type Node and the unbounded wildcard parameterized type Node<?> are essentially equivalent in this regard.

Conversion between the two is type-safe:


Node    rawNode;
Node<?> anyNode;
rawNode = anyNode;  // Node <-- Node<?> is type-safe.

anyNode = rawNode;  // Node<?> <-- Node is type-safe.

The unbounded wildcard parameterized type Node<?> and the upper bounded wildcard parameterized type Node<? extends Object> are also essentially equivalent (see (4)), except when assigned a value of the raw type Node (see (5)).



// (4):
anyNode = extObjNode;  // Node<?> <-- Node<? extends Object> is type-safe.

extObjNode = anyNode;  // Node<? extends Object> <-- Node<?> is type-safe.


// (5):
anyNode    = rawNode;  // Node<?> <-- Node is type-safe.

extObjNode = rawNode;  // Node<? extends Object> <-- Node: Unchecked Conversion
Assigning a value of the raw type Node to a reference of the type Node<? extends Object> results in an unchecked conversion warning—which conforms to the general rule when mixing legacy and generic code: Assigning the value of a raw type to a reference of a bounded wildcard parameterized type or a concrete parameterized type results in an unchecked conversion warning, as illustrated by the examples below.



extNumNode = rawNode; // Node<? extends Number> <-- Node: Unchecked Conversion
intNode    = rawNode; // Node<Integer> <-- Node: Unchecked Conversion
For a discussion of explicit casting of parameterized references, see §11.13, p.
 625.

Suppressing different kinds of unchecked warnings with the @SuppressWarnings("unchecked") annotation is discussed in §11.13, p.
 623, and §25.5, p.
 1582.


Using Parameterized References to Call Set and Get Methods

Generic classes are suitable for implementing ADTs called collections (also called containers) where the element type is usually specified by a type parameter.

The Java Collections Framework is a prime example of such collections.

A collection usually provides two basic operations: a set operation (also called a write or put operation) to add an element to the collection, and a get operation (also called a read operation) to retrieve an element from the collection.

The set operation takes a parameter of the type T, where T is a type parameter of the generic class.

The get operation returns a value of the type parameter T.

The class Node<E> provides these two basic operations to manipulate the data in a node:


class Node<E> {
  private E data;
  // ...
  public void setData(E obj) { data = obj; }        // (1) Set operation.
  public E    getData()      { return data; }       // (2) Get operation.
  // ...
}
So far we have called these two methods using references of concrete parameterized types:


Node<Number> numNode = new Node<>(2020, null);
numNode.setData(2021);                      // (3) Can only set a Number.

Number data = numNode.getData();            // (4) Can only get a Number.

The actual type parameter in the above method calls is a concrete type, but what happens when we use a reference of a wildcard parameterized type that represents a family of types? For example, what if the type of the reference numNode is Node<? extends Number>? Is the method call at (3) type-safe? Is the assignment at (4) type-safe? Operations that can potentially break the type-safety are flagged as either compile-time errors or warnings.

If there are warnings but no errors, the program still compiles.

However, type-safety at runtime is not guaranteed.


The key to using generics in Java is understanding the implications of wildcard parameterized types in the language—and why the compiler will not permit certain operations involving wildcards, since these might break the type-safety of the program.

To illustrate some of the subtleties, we compile the class in Example 11.7 successively with different headers for the method checkIt().

The parameter type is different in each method header, from (h1) to (h5).

The method uses three local variables object, number, and integer of type Object, Number, and Integer, respectively ((v1) to (v3)).

There are three calls to the setData() method of the generic class Node<E> to set an Object, a Number, and an Integer as the data in the node referenced by the reference s0 ((s1) to (s3)).

There are also three calls to the getData() method of the generic class Node<E>, assigning the return value to each of the local variables ((s4) to (s6)).

And finally, the last statement, (s7), tests whether the data retrieved can be put back in again.


Example 11.7 Illustrating Get and Set Operations Using Parameterized References


class WildcardAccessRestrictions {

  static void checkIt(Node s0) {                    // (h1)
//static void checkIt(Node<?> s0) {                 // (h2)
//static void checkIt(Node<? extends Number> s0) {  // (h3)
//static void checkIt(Node<? super Number> s0) {    // (h4)
//static void checkIt(Node<Number> s0) {            // (h5)
    // Local variables
    Object  object  = new Object();                 // (v1)
    Number  number  = 1.5;                          // (v2)
    Integer integer = 10;                           // (v3)
    // Method calls
    s0.setData(object);                             // (s1)
    s0.setData(number);                             // (s2)
    s0.setData(integer);                            // (s3)
    object  = s0.getData();                         // (s4)
    number  = s0.getData();                         // (s5)
    integer = s0.getData();                         // (s6)
    s0.setData(s0.getData());                       // (s7)
  }
}
Attempts to compile the method in Example 11.7 with different headers are shown in Table 11.2.
The rows are statements from (s1) to (s7) from Example 11.7.
The columns indicate the type of the parameter s0 in the method headers (h1) to (h5).
The reference s0 is used to call the methods.
The entry ok means the compiler did not report any errors or any unchecked warnings.
The entry ! means the compiler did not report any errors but issued an unchecked call warning.
The entry × means the compiler reported an error.
In other words, we cannot carry out the operations that are marked with the entry ×.

Table 11.2 Get and Set Operations Using Parameterized References
Type of s0
Node
Node<?>
Node<? extends Number>
Node<? super Number>
Node<Number>
Operation
s0.setData(object);
!
×
×
×
×
s0.setData(number);
!
×
×
ok
ok
s0.setData(integer);
!
×
×
ok
ok
object = s0.getData();
ok
ok
ok
ok
ok
number = s0.getData();
×
×
ok
×
ok
integer = s0.getData();
×
×
×
×
×
s0.setData(s0.get-Data());
!
×
×
×
ok
Raw Type References

The type of the reference s0 is the raw type Node.
This case illustrates the non-generic paradigm of using a collection: We can put any object, but we can only get an Object.
From Table 11.2, we see that we can put any object as data in a node of the raw type Node, but the compiler issues unchecked call warnings, as we are putting an object into a raw type node whose element type is not known.
We can only get an Object, as we cannot be more specific about the data type.

Unbounded Wildcard References: <?>

The type of the reference s0 is Node<?>.
The compiler determines that the actual type parameter for each method call is the wildcard ?—that is, any type.
Obviously, we cannot set any data in a node whose element type cannot be determined.
It might not be type-safe.
And we cannot guarantee the type of its data either because the data type can be of any type, but we can safely read it as an Object.
Note that we can always write a null, as the null value can be assigned to any reference.

Typical use of unbounded wildcard reference is in writing methods that treat the objects in a container as of type Object and make use of Object methods for their operation.
The method below can print the data in any sequence of nodes, given the start node.
The specific type of the data in the node is immaterial.
Note also that the method is not dependent on any type parameter.


void printNodeDataSequence(Node<?> s0) {       // Unbounded parameterized type
  Node<?> next = s0.getNext();                 // Returns node as Node<Object>
  while (next != null) {
    Object obj = next.getData();               // Object reference.
    System.out.println(obj.toString());        // Call Object method
    next = next.getNext();
  }
}
Upper Bounded Wildcard References: <? extends Type>

The type of the reference s0 is Node<? extends Number>, where Type is Number.
This means that the reference s0 refers to a node containing an object whose type is either Number or a subtype of Number, but the specific (sub)type of the object cannot always be determined at compile time.
Putting any object, except a null, into such a node might not be type-safe.

The code below shows what would happen if any object was allowed to be set as data in a Long node via its alias s0.
If (1), (2), or (3) were allowed, we would get a ClassCastException at (4) because the data could not be assigned to a Long reference, as the type-safety of the node longNode will have been compromised, either with a supertype object or an object of an unrelated type.


Long longInt = 20L;
Node<Long> longNode = new Node<>(longInt, null);  // Node of Long, that is
Node<? extends Number> s0 = longNode;// referenced by a Node<? extends Number> ref.
s0.setData(object);                  // If this was allowed, or             (1)
s0.setData(number);                  // if this was allowed, or             (2)
s0.setData(integer);                 // if this was allowed,                (3)
longInt = longNode.getData();        // we would get an exception here.
    (4)
The following method call will also not compile, as the compiler cannot give any guarantees at compile time that the reference s0 will refer to a node of Long at runtime:


s0.setData(longInt);                 // Compile-time error!
The upper bound in the wildcard type ? extends Number is Number.
Therefore, the data of the node with the wildcard type ? extends Number must be a Number (i.e., either an object of type Number or an object of a subtype of Number).
Thus we can only safely assign the reference value returned by the get operation to a reference of type Number or a supertype of Number.

Lower Bounded Wildcard References: <? super Type>

Using a reference of type Node<? super Number>, where Type is Number, we can only put a Number or a subtype object of Number into the node, as such a number would also be a subtype object of any supertype of Number.
Since we cannot guarantee which specific supertype of Number the node actually has, we cannot put any supertype object of Number in the node.
The code below shows what would happen if an unrelated supertype object was put in as data in a Node<? super Number>.
If (1) were allowed, we would get a ClassCastException at (2) because the data value (of a supertype) cannot be assigned to a Number reference (which is a subtype).


Node<Number> numNode = new Node<>(2020, null);
Node<? super Number> s0 = numNode;
s0.setData(object);             // (1) If this set operation was allowed,
number = numNode.getData();     // (2) we would get an exception here.
Since the type of the reference s0 is Node<? super Number>, the reference s0 can refer to a node containing an object whose type is either Number or some supertype of Number.
When we get the data from such a node, we can only safely assume that it is an Object.
Keeping in mind that a reference of a supertype of Number can refer to objects that are unrelated to Number (e.g., an Object reference that can refer to a String), if (3) were allowed in the code below, we would get a ClassCastException at (3):


Node<Object> objNode = new Node<>("Hi", null);  // String as data.
Node<? super Number> s0 = objNode;
number = s0.getData();        // (3) If allowed, we would get an exception here.
object = s0.getData();        // This is always ok.
Unbounded Type References: <Type>

The type of the reference s0 is Node<Number>, where Type is Number.
The actual type parameter for each method call is determined to be Number.
Thus the type of the parameter in the setData() method and the return value of the getData() method is Number.
Therefore, we can pass the reference value of a Number or a subclass object of Number to the setData() method, and can assign the reference value returned by the getData() method to a reference of the type Number or a supertype of Number.
In this case, we can put a Number, and get a Number.

Table 11.3 gives a summary of using parameterized references for set and get operations on a container.
Here are some general guidelines for choosing a wildcard parameterized type:

If we only want to get an element of type E from a container, we can use the upper bounded wildcard ? extends E for the reference.

If we only want to put an element of type E into a container, we can use the lower bounded wildcard ? super E for the reference.

If we want to both get and set elements of type E in a container, we can use the unbounded type E for the reference.

The following acronym might help to remember which parameterized references should be used to invoke get and set methods of a container: GESS (Get-extends-Set-super), meaning for a get method use reference of type <? extends T> and for a set method use reference of type <? super T>.

Table 11.3 Summary of Get and Set Operations Using Parameterized References
Type of s0
Node
Node<?>
Node<? extends Number>
Node<? super Number>
Node<Number>
Operation
set/put/write
Any object
Cannot put anythig except nulls.
Cannot put anything except nulls.
Number or subtype
Number or subtype
get/read
Object only
Object only
Number
Object only
Number
