## 11.6 Bounded Type Parameters

In the declaration of the generic class `Node<E>`, the type parameter `E` is unbounded— that is, it can be any reference type.

However, sometimes it may be necessary to restrict what type the type parameter `E` can represent.

The canonical example is restricting that the type parameter `E` is `Comparable<E>` so that objects can be compared.

Wildcard types cannot be used in the header of a generic class to restrict the type parameter:

```java
class CmpNode<? extends Comparable> { ...
}           // Compile-time error!
```

However, the type parameter can be bounded by a constraint as follows:

```java
class CmpNode<E extends Comparable<E>> { // E is bounded.
  // ...
}
```

In the constraint `<E extends Comparable<E>>`, `E` is bounded and `Comparable<E> `is the upper bound.

This is an example of a [[recursive type bound]].

The declaration above states that the actual type parameter when we parameterize the generic class `CmpNode` must implement the `Comparable` interface, and that the objects of the actual type parameter must be comparable to each other.

This implies that the type, say A, that we can use to parameterize the generic class, must implement the parameterized interface `Comparable<A>`.

If we base the implementation of the `CmpNode` class on the generic class `Node<E>`, we can write the declaration as follows:

```java
class CmpNode<E extends Comparable<E>> extends Node<E> {
  // ...
}
```

The `extends` clause is used in two different ways: 
- for the generic class `CmpNode` to extend the class `Node<E>`, and 
- to constrain the type parameter `E` of the generic class `CmpNode` to the `Comparable<E>` interface.

Although the type parameter `E` must implement the interface `Comparable<E>`, we do not use the keyword implements in a constraint.

Neither can we use the `super` clause to constrain the type parameter of a generic class.

If we want `CmpNodes` to have a natural ordering based on the natural ordering of their data values, we can declare the generic class `CmpNode` as shown in Example 11.8:

```java
class CmpNode<E extends Comparable<E>> extends Node<E>
                                       implements Comparable<CmpNode<E>> {
 // ...
}
```

Note how the `Comparable` interface is parameterized in the `implements` clause.

The constraint `<E extends Comparable<E>>` specifies that the type parameter `E` is `Comparable`, and the clause implements `Comparable<CmpNode<E>>` specifies that the generic class `CmpNode` is `Comparable`.

Example 11.8 Implementing the `Comparable<E>` Interface

```java
class CmpNode < E extends Comparable < E >> extends Node < E > implements Comparable < CmpNode < E >> {

    CmpNode(E data, CmpNode < E > next) {
        super(data, next);
    }

    @Override 
    public int compareTo(CmpNode < E > node2) {
        return this.getData().compareTo(node2.getData());
    }
}
```

Here are some examples of how the generic class `CmpNode` in Example 11.8 can be parameterized:

```java
CmpNode<Integer> intCmpNode  = new CmpNode<>(2020, null);         // (1)
CmpNode<Number>  numCmpNode  = new CmpNode<Number>(2020, null);   // (2) Error!
CmpNode<Integer> intCmpNode2 = new CmpNode<>(2021, null);
int result = intCmpNode.compareTo(intCmpNode2);
```


The actual type parameter `Integer` at (1) implements `Comparable<Integer>`, but the actual type parameter `Number` at (2) is not `Comparable`.

In the declaration `CmpNode<A>`, the compiler ensures that `A` implements `Comparable<A>`.


## Multiple Bounds

A bounded type parameter can have [[multiple bounds]], `B1 & B2 & ... & Bn`, which must be satisfied by the actual type parameter:

```java
class CmpNode<E extends Number & Serializable> ...
```

An extra bound, the `Serializable` interface, has been added using the ampersand `(&)`.

The formal type parameter `E` is a subtype of both `Number` and `Serializable`, and represents both of these concrete types in the body of the generic class.

The constraint above will only allow the generic type to be parameterized by an actual type parameter which is a subtype of both `Number` and `Serializable`.

We can add as many bounds as necessary.

A type parameter `E` having multiple bounds is a subtype of all of the types denoted by the individual bounds.

A bound can be a parameterized type, as in the following generic class header:

```java
class CmpNode<E extends Comparable<E> & Serializable> ...
```

If the raw type of a bound is a (non-final) superclass of the bounded type parameter, it can only be specified as the first bound, and there can only be one such bound (as a subclass can only extend one immediate superclass).

The [[raw type of an individual bound cannot be used with different type arguments]], since a type parameter cannot be the subtype of more than one bound having the same raw type.

In the class header below, whatever `E` is, it cannot be a subtype of two parameterizations of the same interface type (i.e., `Comparable`) at the same time:

```java
class CmpNode<E extends Comparable<E> & Serializable & Comparable<String>> //Error
```

If the type parameter has a bound, methods of the bound can be invoked on instances of the type parameter in the generic class.

Otherwise, only methods from the `Object` class can be invoked on instances of the type parameter.

In the declaration of the generic class `Node<E>` in Example 11.2, p. 568, we cannot call any methods on instances of the type parameter except for those in the `Object` class because the type parameter is unbounded.

Since the instances of the type parameter `E` are guaranteed to be `Comparable<E>` in the generic class `CmpNode`, we can call the method com-`pareTo()` of the `Comparable` interface on these instances.

