## 10.1 Garbage Collection
Efficient memory management is essential in a runtime system.

Storage for objects is allocated in a designated part of the memory called the heap, which has a finite size.

Garbage collection (GC) is a process of managing the heap efficiently, by reclaiming memory occupied by objects that are no longer needed and making it available for new objects.

Java provides automatic garbage collection, meaning that the runtime environment can take care of memory management without the program having to take any special action.

Objects allocated on the heap (through the new operator) are administered by the automatic garbage collector.

The automatic garbage collection scheme guarantees that a reference to an object is always valid while the object is needed by the program.

Specifically, the object will not be reclaimed if it will result in a dangling reference—that is, a reference to an object that no longer exists.

Having an automatic garbage collector frees the programmer from the responsibility of writing code for deleting objects.

By relying on the automatic garbage collector, a Java program also forfeits any significant influence on the garbage collection of its objects (p.537).

However, this price is insignificant when compared to the cost of putting the code for object management in place and plugging all the memory leaks.

Time-critical applications should recognize that the automatic garbage collector runs as a background task and may have a negative impact on their performance.