10.2 Reachable Objects
An automatic garbage collector essentially performs two tasks:
    Decides if and when memory needs to be reclaimed
    
    Finds objects that are no longer needed by the program and reclaims their storage

A program has no guarantees that the automatic garbage collector will be run during its execution.

Consequently, a program should not rely on the scheduling of the automatic garbage collector for its behavior (p.537).

To understand how the automatic garbage collector finds objects whose storage should be reclaimed, we need to look at the activity happening in the JVM.

Java provides thread-based multitasking, meaning that several threads can be executing concurrently in the JVM, each doing its own task.

A thread is an independent path of execution through the program code.

A thread is alive if it has not completed its execution.

Each live thread has its own JVM stack (§7.1, p.365).

The JVM stack contains activation frames of methods that are currently active.

Local references declared in a method can always be found in the method’s activation frame, stored on the JVM stack associated with the thread in which the method is called.

Objects, in contrast, are always created on the heap.

If an object has a field reference, the field will be found inside the object in the heap, and the object denoted by the field reference will also be found in the heap.

An example of how memory is organized during execution is depicted in Figure 10.1, which shows two live threads (t1 and t2) and their respective JVM stacks with the activation frames.

The diagram indicates which objects in the heap are referenced by local references in the method activation frames.

It also identifies field references in objects, which refer to other objects in the heap.

Some objects have several aliases.

An object in the heap is said to be reachable if it is referenced by any local reference in a JVM stack.

Likewise, any object that is denoted by a reference in a reachable object is said to be reachable.

Reachability is a transitive relationship.

Thus a reachable object has at least one chain of reachable references from the JVM stack.

Any reference that makes an object reachable is called a reachable reference.

An object that is not reachable is said to be unreachable.

A reachable object is alive, and is accessible by a live thread.

Note that an object can be accessible by more than one thread.

Any object that is not accessible by a live thread is a candidate for garbage collection.

When an object becomes unreachable and is waiting for its memory to be reclaimed, it is said to be eligible for garbage collection.

An object is eligible for garbage collection if all references denoting it are in eligible objects.

Eligible objects do not affect the future course of program execution.

When the garbage collector runs, it finds and reclaims the storage of eligible objects, although garbage collection does not necessarily occur as soon as an object becomes unreachable.

In Figure 10.1, the objects o4, o5, o11, o12, o14, and o15 all have reachable references.

Objects o13 and o16 have no reachable references, and therefore, are eligible for garbage collection.

From the preceding discussion we can conclude that if a compound object becomes unreachable, its constituent objects also become unreachable, barring any reachable references to the constituent objects.

Although the objects o1, o2, and o3 in Figure 10.1 form a circular list, they do not have any reachable references.

Thus these objects are all eligible for garbage collection.

Conversely, the objects o5, o6, and o7 form a linear list, but they are all reachable, as the first object in the list, o5, is reachable.

The objects o8, o10, o11, and o9 also form a linear list (in that order), but not all objects in the list are reachable.

Only the objects o9 and o11 are reachable, as object o11 has a reachable reference.

The objects o8 and o10 are eligible for garbage collection.

The lifetime of an object is the time from its creation to the time it is garbage collected.

Under normal circumstances, an object is accessible from the time when it is created to the time when it becomes unreachable.

The lifetime of an object can also include a period when it is eligible for garbage collection, waiting for its storage to be reclaimed.