## 10.3 Facilitating Garbage Collection

The automatic garbage collector determines which objects are not reachable, and therefore, are eligible for garbage collection.

It will certainly go to work if there is an imminent memory shortage.

Even so, automatic garbage collection should not be perceived as a license for creating a plethora of objects and then forgetting about them.

Nevertheless, certain programming practices can help in minimizing the overhead associated with garbage collection during program execution.

Certain objects, such as files and network connections, can tie up resources and should be disposed of properly when they are no longer needed.

In most cases, the try-with-resources statement (§7.7, p.407) provides a convenient facility for such purposes, as it will always ensure proper closing of any AutoCloseable resources.

To optimize its memory footprint, a live thread should retain access to an object for only as long as the object is needed for its execution.

The program can allow objects to become eligible for garbage collection as early as possible by removing all references to an object when it is no longer needed.

Objects that are created and accessed by local references in a method are eligible for garbage collection when the method terminates, unless reference values to these objects are exported out of the method.

This can occur if a reference value is returned from the method, passed as an argument to another method that records the reference value, or thrown as an exception.

However, a method need not always leave objects to be garbage collected after its termination.

It can facilitate garbage collection by taking suitable action—for example, by nulling references.

```java
import java.io.*;

class WellBehavedClass {
    // ...
    void wellBehavedMethod() {
        FileReader reader;
        long[] bigArray = new long[20000];
        // ... uses local variables ...
        // Does clean-up (before starting something extensive)
        reader = null; // (1)
        bigArray = null; // (2)

        // Start some other extensive activity
        // ...
    }
    // ...
}
```

In this code, the local variables are set to null after use at (1) and (2), before starting some other extensive activity.

This makes the objects denoted by the local variables eligible for garbage collection from this point onward, rather than after the method terminates.

This optimization technique of nulling references should be used only as a last resort when resources are scarce.

Here are some other techniques to facilitate garbage collection:

  When a method returns a reference value and the object denoted by the value is not needed, not assigning this value to a reference facilitates garbage collection.

  If a reference is assigned a new value, the object that was previously denoted by the reference can become eligible for garbage collection.

  Removing reachable references to a compound object can make the constituent objects become eligible for garbage collection, as explained earlier.