## 10.6 Field Initializer Expressions

Initialization of fields can be specified in field declaration statements using initializer expressions.

The value of the initializer expression must be assignment compatible with the declared field.

We distinguish between static and non-static field initializers.

```java
class ConstantInitializers {
            int minAge        = 12;   // (1) Non-static

  static double pensionPoints = 10.5; // (2) Static
  // ...
}
```
The fields of an object are initialized with the values of initializer expressions when the object is created by using the `new` operator.

In the previous example, the declaration at (1) will result in the field `minAge` being initialized to `12` in every object of the class `ConstantInitializers` created with the `new` operator.

If no explicit initializer expressions are specified, default values are assigned to the fields.

When a class is loaded, it is initialized, meaning its static fields are initialized with the values of the initializer expressions.

The declaration at (2) will result in the static field `pensionPoints` being initialized to `10.5` when the class is loaded by the JVM.

Again, if no explicit initializers are specified, default values are assigned to the static fields.

An initializer expression for a static field cannot refer to non-static members by their simple names.

The keywords `this` and `super` cannot occur in a `static` initializer expression.

Since a class is always initialized before it can be instantiated, an instance initializer expression can always refer to any static member of a class, regardless of the member declaration order.

In the following code, the instance initializer expression at (1) refers to the static field `NO_OF_WEEKS` declared and initialized at (2).

Such a forward reference is legal.

More examples of forward references are given in the next subsection.

```java
class MoreInitializers {
         int noOfDays    = 7 * NO_OF_WEEKS;    // (1) Non-static
  static int NO_OF_WEEKS = 52;                 // (2) Static
  // ...
}
```
Initializer expressions can also be used to define constants in interfaces (ยง5.6, p.254).

Such initializer expressions are implicitly static, as they define values of `static final` fields in an interface.

Initializer expressions are used to initialize local variables as well (ยง3.4, p.102).

A local variable is initialized with the value of the initializer expression every time the local variable declaration is executed.

## Declaration Order of Initializer Expressions

When an object is created using the `new` operator, instance initializer expressions are executed in the order in which the instance fields are declared in the class.

Java requires that the declaration of a field must occur before its usage in any initializer expression if the field is used on the `right-hand side of an assignment` in the initializer expression.

This essentially means that the declaration of a field must occur before the value of the field is read in an initializer expression.

Using the field on the `left-hand side of an assignment` in the initializer expression does not violate the `declaration-before-reading rule`, as this constitutes a write operation.

This rule applies when the usage of the field is by its simple name.

There is one caveat to the `declaration-before-reading rule`: 

  It does not apply if the initializer expression defines an anonymous class, as the usage then occurs in a different class that has its own accessibility rules in the enclosing context.

  The restrictions outlined earlier help to detect initialization anomalies at compile time.

In the next code example, the initialization at (2) generates a compile-time error because the field `width` in the initializer expression violates the `declaration-before-reading rule`.

Because the usage of the field `width` in the initializer expression at (2) does not occur on the `left-hand side of the assignment`, this is an illegal forward reference.

To remedy the error, the declaration of the field width at (4) can be moved in front of the declaration at (2).

In any case, we can use the keyword `this` as shown at (3), but it will read the default value 0 in the field width.

```java
class NonStaticInitializers {
    int length = 10;                    // (1)
    //double area = length * width;     // (2) Not OK. Illegal forward reference.
    double area = length * this.width;  // (3) OK, but width has default value 0.
    int width = 10;                     // (4)

    int sqSide = height = 20;           // (5) OK.Legal forward  reference.
    int height;                         // (6)
}
```
The forward reference at (5) is legal.

The usage of the field height in the initializer expression at (5) occurs on the `left-hand side of the assignment`.

The initializer expression at (5) is evaluated as `(sqSide = (height = 20))`.

Every object of the class `NonStaticInitializers` will have the fields `height` and `sqSide` set to the value `20`.

The `declaration-before-reading` rule is equally applicable to static initializer expressions when static fields are referenced by their simple names.

Example 10.1 shows why the order of field initializer expressions can be important.

The initializer expressions in this example are calls to methods defined in the class, and methods are not subject to the same access rules as initializer expressions.

The call at (2) to the method `initMaxGuests()` defined at (4) is expected to return the `maximum number of guests`,

  but the field `occupancyPerRoom` at (3) will not have been explicitly initialized at this point; 
  
  therefore, its default value 0 will be used in the method `initMaxGuests()`, which will return a logically incorrect value.

The program output shows that after object creation, 
  the occupancy per room is correct, 
  but the maximum number of guests is wrong.

Example 10.1 Initializer Expression Order and Method Calls

```java
// File: TestOrder.java
class Hotel {
    private int noOfRooms = 12;                             // (1)
    private int maxNoOfGuests = initMaxGuests();            // (2) Bug
    private int occupancyPerRoom = 2;                       // (3)
    public int initMaxGuests() {                            // (4)
        System.out.println("occupancyPerRoom: " + occupancyPerRoom);
        System.out.println("maxNoOfGuests:    " + noOfRooms * occupancyPerRoom);
        return noOfRooms * occupancyPerRoom;
    }

    public int getMaxGuests() { return maxNoOfGuests; }     // (5)

    public int getOccupancy() { return occupancyPerRoom; }  // (6)
}


public class TestOrder {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Hotel hotel = new Hotel();                                          // (7)
        System.out.println("AFTER OBJECT CREATION");
        System.out.println("occupancyPerRoom: " + hotel.getOccupancy());    // (8)
        System.out.println("maxNoOfGuests:    " + hotel.getMaxGuests());    // (9)
    }
}
```
```
Output from the program:
occupancyPerRoom: 0
maxNoOfGuests:    0
AFTER OBJECT CREATION
occupancyPerRoom: 2
maxNoOfGuests:    0
```

## Exception Handling and Initializer Expressions

Initializer expressions in named classes and interfaces must not result in any uncaught checked exception (ยง7.2, p.374).

If any checked exception is thrown during execution of an initializer expression, it must be caught and handled by code called from the initializer expression.

This restriction does not apply to instance initializer expressions in anonymous classes.

Example 10.2 illustrates exception handling for initializer expressions in named classes.

The static initializer expression at (3) calls the static method `createHotel-Pool()` at (4), which catches and handles the checked `TooManyHotelsException` defined at (2).

If the method `createHotelPool()` were to use the throws clause to specify the checked exception, instead of catching and handling it within a try-catch block, the initializer expression at (3), which called the method, would have to handle the exception.

However, the initializer expression cannot specify any exception handling, as the compiler would complain.

The instance initializer expression at (5) calls the method `initMaxGuests()` at (6), which can throw the unchecked `RoomOccupancyTooHighException`.

If thrown, this exception will be caught and handled in the main() method.

Program output confirms that an unchecked `RoomOccupancyTooHighException` was thrown during program execution.

Example 10.2 Exceptions in Initializer Expressions

```java
// File: ExceptionsInInitializers.java
class RoomOccupancyTooHighException
      extends RuntimeException {}                     // (1) Unchecked Exception
class TooManyHotelsException
      extends Exception {}                            // (2) Checked Exception
```

```java
class Hotel {
    // Static Members
    private static int noOfHotels = 12;
    private static Hotel[] hotelPool = createHotelPool();   // (3)

    private static Hotel[] createHotelPool() {              // (4)
        try {
            if (noOfHotels > 10)
                throw new TooManyHotelsException();
        } catch (TooManyHotelsException e) {
            noOfHotels = 10;
            System.out.println("No. of hotels adjusted to " + noOfHotels);
        }
        return new Hotel[noOfHotels];
    }
    // Instance Members
    private int noOfRooms = 215;
    private int occupancyPerRoom = 5;
    private int maxNoOfGuests = initMaxGuests();            // (5)

    private int initMaxGuests() {                           // (6)
        if (occupancyPerRoom > 4)
            throw new RoomOccupancyTooHighException();
        return noOfRooms * occupancyPerRoom;
    }
}
```
  
```java
public class ExceptionsInInitializers {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        try {
            new Hotel();
        } catch (RoomOccupancyTooHighException exception) {
            exception.printStackTrace();
        }
    }
}
```
```
Output from the program:
Click here to view code image
No.of hotels adjusted to 10
RoomOccupancyTooHighException
      at Hotel.initMaxGuests(ExceptionsInInitializers.java:29)
      at Hotel.<init>(ExceptionsInInitializers.java:25)
      at ExceptionsInInitializers.main(ExceptionsInInitializers.java:36)
```